Preprocessor symbols for nullable reference types: Define a single nullable context. (#1123)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/lexical-structure.md

### 6.5.1 General

> The pre-processing directives provide the ability to conditionally skip sections of compilation units, to report error and warning conditions, to delineate distinct regions of source code, and to set the nullable context.

Reviewer: Reading this now “nullable context” caused a pause. We have a null analysis, which may be enabled or disabled; and certain annotations (like adding a `?` to a type) etc. which both provide input to that analysis and which are treated differently depending on whether the analysis is being done. Is this a “nullable context”, a ”null analysis context”, something else?

Author: Tracked in the epic.

Reviewer: Re: [epic comment](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/issues/1085#issuecomment-2221397275) – yes “is being done” should be worded ”is enabled/disabled”. Which unfortunately highlights something we are stuck with – the analysis is always being done but the pragmas enable/disable it… C’est la vie

> *Note*: Although a *PP_Compilation_Unit_Name* might contain text that looks like an escape sequence, such text is not an escape sequence; in this context a ‘`\`’ character simply designates an ordinary backslash character. *end note*

### §Nullable-Directives Nullable directive

The nullable directive controls the nullable context, as described below.

```ANTLR
fragment PP_Nullable
    : PP_Whitespace? '#' PP_Whitespace? 'nullable' PP_Whitespace PP_Nullable_Action
        (PP_Whitespace PP_Nullable_Target)? PP_New_Line
    ;
fragment PP_Nullable_Action
    : 'disable'
    | 'enable'
    | 'restore'
    ;
fragment PP_Nullable_Target
    : 'warnings'
    | 'annotations'
    ;
```

A nullable directive sets the denoted nullable context for subsequent lines of code, until another nullable directive overrides it, or until the end of the source code is reached. The effect of each form of nullable directive is, as follows:

- `#nullable disable`: Sets the nullable context to “disabled”.

> - `#nullable enable`: Sets the nullable context to “enabled”.

Reviewer: Needs to say both annotations and warnings are enabled.

The previous bullet could also say it disables both, though that is not so important if the  options are:

- null context disabled, or
- null context enabled with annotations and/or warnings

Reviewer 2: Personally I'd prefer the approach of saying "enables both annotations and warnings".

Reviewer 2: In meeting: yes, make each of these specify the effect on both flags.

- `#nullable restore`: Restores the nullable context to the state specified by the external mechanism, if any.
- `#nullable disable annotations`: Disables nullable annotations. Nullable warnings are unaffected.
- `#nullable enable annotations`: Enables nullable annotations. Nullable warnings are unaffected.
- `#nullable restore annotations`: Restores nullable annotations to the state specified by the external mechanism, if any. Warnings are unaffected.
- `#nullable disable warnings`: Disables nullable warnings. Nullable annotations are unaffected.
- `#nullable enable warnings`: Enables nullable warnings. Nullable annotations are unaffected.
- `#nullable restore warnings`: Restores nullable warnings to the state specified by the external mechanism, if any. Nullable annotations are unaffected.

> Disabling the nullable context when it is already disabled has no effect. Likewise, enabling the nullable context when it is already enabled has no effect.

Reviewer: `#nullable enable` has an effect if only one of annotations and warnings are currently enabled as it enables the other.

Reviewer 2: In meeting: no need for this.

> *Note*: Although a *PP_Compilation_Unit_Name* might contain text that looks like an escape sequence, such text is not an escape sequence; in this context a ‘`\`’ character simply designates an ordinary backslash character. *end note*

### §Nullable-Directives Nullable directive

The nullable directive controls the nullable context, as described below.

```ANTLR
fragment PP_Nullable
    : PP_Whitespace? '#' PP_Whitespace? 'nullable' PP_Whitespace PP_Nullable_Action
        (PP_Whitespace PP_Nullable_Target)? PP_New_Line
    ;
fragment PP_Nullable_Action
    : 'disable'
    | 'enable'
    | 'restore'
    ;
fragment PP_Nullable_Target
    : 'warnings'
    | 'annotations'
    ;
```

> A nullable directive sets the available flags for subsequent lines of code, until another nullable directive overrides it, or until the end of the source code is reached. The nullable context contains two flags: *annotations* and *warnings*. The effect of each form of nullable directive is, as follows:

Reviewer: “until the end of the compilation unit is reached”? (or *compilation_unit*)

> A nullable directive sets the available flags for subsequent lines of code, until another nullable directive overrides it, or until the end of the source code is reached. The nullable context contains two flags: *annotations* and *warnings*. The effect of each form of nullable directive is, as follows:

Author: ```suggestion
A nullable directive sets the available flags for subsequent lines of code, until another nullable directive overrides it, or until the end of the *compilation _unit* is reached. The nullable context contains two flags: *annotations* and *warnings*. The effect of each form of nullable directive is, as follows:
```

- `#nullable disable`: Disables both nullable annotations and nullable warnings flags.
- `#nullable enable`: Enables both nullable annotations and nullable warnings flags.
- `#nullable restore`: Restores both the annotations and warnings flags to the state specified by the external mechanism, if any.
- `#nullable disable annotations`: Disables the nullable annotations flag. The nullable warnings flag is unaffected.
- `#nullable enable annotations`: Enables the nullable annotations flag. The nullable warnings flag is unaffected.
- `#nullable restore annotations`: Restores the nullable annotations flag to the state specified by the external mechanism, if any. The nullable warnings flag is unaffected.
- `#nullable disable warnings`: Disables the nullable warnings flag. The nullable annotations flag is unaffected.
- `#nullable enable warnings`: Enables the nullable warnings flag. The nullable annotations flag is unaffected.
- `#nullable restore warnings`: Restores the nullable warnings flag to the state specified by the external mechanism, if any. The nullable annotations flag is unaffected.

> The nullable state of expressions is tracked at all times. The state of the annotation flag determines the initial null state of a variable declaration. Warnings are only issued when the warnings flag is enabled.

Reviewer: “The nullable state of expressions…” vs. “…initial null state of a variable…”
Change the former to “null”?
“is tracked” -> ”shall be tracked” – that’s one for @RexJaeschke to determine, but the tense seems wrong to me and maybe the Standardese.

> The nullable state of expressions is tracked at all times. The state of the annotation flag determines the initial null state of a variable declaration. Warnings are only issued when the warnings flag is enabled.

Reviewer 3: The state of the annotation flag *and* the presence or absence of a nullable annotation `?`.

> The nullable state of expressions is tracked at all times. The state of the annotation flag determines the initial null state of a variable declaration. Warnings are only issued when the warnings flag is enabled.

Author: ```suggestion
The nullable state of expressions is tracked at all times. The state of the annotation flag and the presence or absence of a nullable annotation, `?`, determines the initial null state of a variable declaration. Warnings are only issued when the warnings flag is enabled.
```

> *Example*: The example
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-console", name:"InitialWarning", ignoredWarnings:["CS8602"], expectedException:"NullReferenceException"} -->
> ```csharp
> #nullable disable
> string x = null;
> string y = "";
> #nullable enable
> Console.WriteLine(x.Length); // Warning
> Console.WriteLine(y.Length);
> ```
>

> > produces a compile-time warning (“dereference of a possible null reference”). The nullable state of `x` is tracked everywhere. A warning is issued when the warnings flag is enabled.

Reviewer: I would replace:

> (“dereference of a possible null reference”)

with

> (as `x` is `null`)

as the former reads like it is specifying the error text, including “possible”, even though we know its non-normative.

Of course this also states *non normatively* that there will be a warning, we is also not currently required…

> > produces a compile-time warning (“dereference of a possible null reference”). The nullable state of `x` is tracked everywhere. A warning is issued when the warnings flag is enabled.

Author: ```suggestion
> produces a compile-time warning (“as `x` is `null`”). The nullable state of `x` is tracked everywhere. A warning is issued when the warnings flag is enabled.
```
